Introduced Data Transformer (#2555)
foundry-rs/starknet-foundry: docs/src/starknet/calldata-transformation.md

Reviewer: My only caveat with this page is that it's quite in depth at times where some kind of maybe a simple explanation would also be nice to have.
I think we can improve that in a separate issue though.

    --contract-address 0x016ad425af4585102e139d4fb2c76ce786d1aaa1cfcd88a51f3ed66601b23cdd \
    --function tuple_fn \
    --calldata (0x10, 3, data_stransformer_contract::Enum::One) \
    --block-id latest
```

getting the same result.

> 📝 **Note**
> All data types are serialized according to the official [Starknet specification](https://docs.starknet.io/architecture-and-concepts/smart-contracts/serialization-of-cairo-types/).

> 📝 **Note**
> User-defined items such as enums and structs should be referred to depending on a way they are defined in ABI.
> In general, paths to items have form: `<project-name>::<module-path>::<item-name>`.

### Supported data types

Cast supports expression of most important Cairo types:
  * `bool`
  * signed numbers (`i8`, `i16`, `i32`, `i64`, `i128`)
  * unsigned numbers (`u8`, `u16`, `u32`, `u64`, `u128`, `u256`, `u512`)
  * `felt252` (numeric literals and so-called *shortstrings*)
  * `ByteArray`
  * `ContractAddress`
  * `ClassHash`
  * `StorageAddress`
  * `EthAddress`
  * `bytes31`
  * `Array` - using `array![]` macro

Numeric types (primitives and `felt252`) can be paseed with type suffix specified - for example `--calldata 420_u64`.

> It's **not allowed** to write any function call expressions, either builtin, or user-defined.

Reviewer 2: I would make it more verbose, the message of this line isn't obvious to me

### More complex examples

  1. `complex_fn` - different data types:

  ```shell
  $ sncast --account myuser \
      call \
      --url http://127.0.0.1:5050 \
      --contract-address 0x016ad425af4585102e139d4fb2c76ce786d1aaa1cfcd88a51f3ed66601b23cdd \

>       --function tuple_fn \

Reviewer: I think it should be `complex_fn`

      --calldata \
          array![array![1, 2], array![3, 4, 5], array![6]] \
          12 \
          -128_i8 \
          "Some string (a ByteArray)" \
          ('a shortstring', 32_u32) \
          true \
          0xffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffff \
      --block-id latest
  ```

  2. `complex_struct_fn` - struct nesting:

  ```shell
  $ sncast --account myuser \
      call \
      --url http://127.0.0.1:5050 \
      --contract-address 0x016ad425af4585102e139d4fb2c76ce786d1aaa1cfcd88a51f3ed66601b23cdd \
      --function tuple_fn \
      --calldata \

>           data_transformer_contract::ComplexStruct { \

Author: It should be `NestedStructWithField` instead, my fault

              a: data_transformer_contract::SimpleStruct { a: 10 }, \
              b: 12 \
          } \
      --block-id latest
  ```

### Caveats

Reasoning about calldata serialization logic is not always possible for Cast. **In particular, Cast doesn't verify serialized calldata against the ABI**.

When given a calldata, Cast first tries to transform it according to the contract ABI.
When failed, in case of type or length mismatch, it will then try to interpret it as an already serialized data.

Thus, calldata written in hex-encoded form is not always going to be interpreted as a list of felts and treated as serialized. Let's see an example:

Our `DataTransformerContract` exposes a method with signature:
```rust
fn u256_fn(self: @ContractState, a: u256) { ... }
```

We can write:
```shell
$ sncast --account myuser \
  call \
  --url http://127.0.0.1:5050 \
  --contract-address 0x016ad425af4585102e139d4fb2c76ce786d1aaa1cfcd88a51f3ed66601b23cdd \
  --function u256_fn \
  --calldata 0x10 \
  --block-id latest
```

> Despite the call data **not being** the proper serialization of an `u256` (which would be `0x10 0x0`), call succeeds.

Reviewer: Maybe this should be a bit more strongly worded e.g. explicitly warn users to always use type suffixes etc. so their data doesn't become serialized incorrectly

Reviewer: Also it would probably make sense to add a flag that disables data transformation just to be extra sure. This could be a separate issue and tackled by someone else though

# Calldata Transformation

For the examples below, we will consider a dedicated contract - `DataTransformerContract`, defined in `data_transformer_contract` project namespace.

It's declared on Sepolia network with class hash `0x02a9b456118a86070a8c116c41b02e490f3dcc9db3cad945b4e9a7fd7cec9168`.

It has a few methods accepting different types and items defined in its namespace:

```rust
// data_transformer_contract/src/lib.cairo

pub struct SimpleStruct {
    a: felt252
}

pub struct NestedStructWithField {
    a: SimpleStruct,
    b: felt252
}

pub enum Enum {
    One: (),
    Two: u128,
    Three: NestedStructWithField
}

#[starknet::contract]
pub mod DataTransformerContract {
    /* ... */

    use super::*;

    fn tuple_fn(self: @ContractState, a: (felt252, u8, Enum)) { ... }

>     fn complex_struct_fn(self: @ContractState, a: ComplexStruct) { ... }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    fn nested_struct_fn(self: @ContractState, a: NestedStructWithField) { ... }
```

    fn complex_fn(
        self: @ContractState,
        arr: Array<Array<felt252>>,
        one: u8,
        two: i16,
        three: ByteArray,
        four: (felt252, u32),
        five: bool,
        six: u256
    ) {
        ...
    }
}
```

A default form of calldata passed to commands requiring it is a series of hex-encoded felts:

```shell
$ sncast --account myuser \
    call \
    --url http://127.0.0.1:5050 \
    --contract-address 0x016ad425af4585102e139d4fb2c76ce786d1aaa1cfcd88a51f3ed66601b23cdd \
    --function tuple_fn \
    --calldata 0x10 0x3 0x0 \
    --block-id latest
```

However, `sncast` allows passing the data in far more handy, human-readable form - as Cairo expressions.
When calldata is delivered in such form, Cast will perform serialization automatically, based on an ABI of the contract we interact with.

> ### Basic example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Basic Example
```

We can write the same command as above, but with expression calldata:

```shell
$ sncast --account myuser \
    call \
    --url http://127.0.0.1:5050 \
    --contract-address 0x016ad425af4585102e139d4fb2c76ce786d1aaa1cfcd88a51f3ed66601b23cdd \
    --function tuple_fn \
    --calldata (0x10, 3, data_stransformer_contract::Enum::One) \
    --block-id latest
```

getting the same result.

> 📝 **Note**
> All data types are serialized according to the official [Starknet specification](https://docs.starknet.io/architecture-and-concepts/smart-contracts/serialization-of-cairo-types/).

> 📝 **Note**
> User-defined items such as enums and structs should be referred to depending on a way they are defined in ABI.
> In general, paths to items have form: `<project-name>::<module-path>::<item-name>`.

> ### Supported expressions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Supported Expressions
```

> 💡 **Info**
> Only **constant** expressions are supported. Defining and referencing variables and calling functions (either builtin, user-defined or external) is not allowed.

> Cast supports most important Cairo corelib types:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cast supports converting most important Cairo corelib types:
```

  * `bool`
  * signed integers (`i8`, `i16`, `i32`, `i64`, `i128`)
  * unsigned integers (`u8`, `u16`, `u32`, `u64`, `u96`, `u128`, `u256`, `u384`, `u512`)
  * `felt252` (numeric literals and so-called *shortstrings*)
  * `ByteArray`
  * `ContractAddress`
  * `ClassHash`
  * `StorageAddress`
  * `EthAddress`
  * `bytes31`
  * `Array` - using `array![]` macro

Numeric types (primitives and `felt252`) can be paseed with type suffix specified - for example `--calldata 420_u64`.

> ### More complex examples

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## More Complex Examples
```

  1. `complex_fn` - different data types:

  ```shell
  $ sncast --account myuser \
      call \
      --url http://127.0.0.1:5050 \
      --contract-address 0x016ad425af4585102e139d4fb2c76ce786d1aaa1cfcd88a51f3ed66601b23cdd \
      --function complex_fn \
      --calldata \
          array![array![1, 2], array![3, 4, 5], array![6]] \
          12 \
          -128_i8 \
          "Some string (a ByteArray)" \
          ('a shortstring', 32_u32) \
          true \
          0xffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffff \
      --block-id latest
  ```

  2. `nested_struct_fn` - struct nesting:

  ```shell
  $ sncast --account myuser \
      call \
      --url http://127.0.0.1:5050 \
      --contract-address 0x016ad425af4585102e139d4fb2c76ce786d1aaa1cfcd88a51f3ed66601b23cdd \
      --function nested_struct_fn \
      --calldata \
          data_transformer_contract::NestedStructWithField { \
              a: data_transformer_contract::SimpleStruct { a: 10 }, \
              b: 12 \
          } \
      --block-id latest
  ```

> ### Caveats

Reviewer: Unless it was meant to be a subsection

```suggestion
## Caveats
```

}

pub enum Enum {
    One: (),
    Two: u128,
    Three: NestedStructWithField
}

#[starknet::contract]
pub mod DataTransformerContract {
    /* ... */

    use super::*;

    fn tuple_fn(self: @ContractState, a: (felt252, u8, Enum)) { ... }

    fn nested_struct_fn(self: @ContractState, a: NestedStructWithField) { ... }

    fn complex_fn(
        self: @ContractState,
        arr: Array<Array<felt252>>,
        one: u8,
        two: i16,
        three: ByteArray,
        four: (felt252, u32),
        five: bool,
        six: u256
    ) {
        ...
    }
}
```

A default form of calldata passed to commands requiring it is a series of hex-encoded felts:

```shell
$ sncast --account myuser \
    call \
    --url http://127.0.0.1:5050 \
    --contract-address 0x016ad425af4585102e139d4fb2c76ce786d1aaa1cfcd88a51f3ed66601b23cdd \
    --function tuple_fn \
    --calldata 0x10 0x3 0x0 \
    --block-id latest
```

However, `sncast` allows passing the data in far more handy, human-readable form - as a series of Cairo expressions.
When calldata is delivered in such form, Cast will perform serialization automatically, based on an ABI of the contract we interact with.

> 📝 **Note**

> > Calldata transformation becomes engaged when following requirements are met:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Calldata transformation is enabled only when following requirements are met:
```

>

> > * **Arguments are comma-separated** (on a contrary to a standard serialized input which is whitespace-separatd). Note the lack of commas in the example above - it signals Cast that the input is serialized.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> * **Arguments are comma-separated** (on a contrary to a standard serialized input which is whitespace-separated). Note the lack of commas in the example above - it signals Cast that the input is serialized.
```

>
> * If **only one argument without a comma** is given, it should be a **nontrivial** expression (e.g. a struct or enum constructor).\
>  It cannot be a simple numeric litral - `--calldata 0x2137` will be treated as serialized.\
>  To enable transformation of such a literal, we need to add a type suffix -\
>  for example: `--calldata 0x2137_u96`. See [Caveats](./calldata-transformation.md#caveats)
>
> * Expressions should match the **Cairo syntax** and use **allowed items** - see [Supported expressions](./calldata-transformation.md#supported-expressions)

### Basic example

We can write the same command as above, but with expression calldata:

```shell
$ sncast --account myuser \
    call \
    --url http://127.0.0.1:5050 \
    --contract-address 0x016ad425af4585102e139d4fb2c76ce786d1aaa1cfcd88a51f3ed66601b23cdd \
    --function tuple_fn \
    --calldata (0x10, 3, data_stransformer_contract::Enum::One) \
    --block-id latest
```

> getting the same result.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
getting the same result. Note that values are separated by commas `,`.
```

I know this is repeated but I think it might be worth mentioning again.

# Calldata Transformation

For the examples below, we will consider a dedicated contract - `DataTransformerContract`, defined in `data_transformer_contract` project namespace.

It's declared on Sepolia network with class hash `0x02a9b456118a86070a8c116c41b02e490f3dcc9db3cad945b4e9a7fd7cec9168`.

It has a few methods accepting different types and items defined in its namespace:

```rust
// data_transformer_contract/src/lib.cairo

pub struct SimpleStruct {
    a: felt252
}

pub struct NestedStructWithField {
    a: SimpleStruct,
    b: felt252
}

pub enum Enum {
    One: (),
    Two: u128,
    Three: NestedStructWithField
}

#[starknet::contract]
pub mod DataTransformerContract {
    /* ... */

    use super::*;

    fn tuple_fn(self: @ContractState, a: (felt252, u8, Enum)) { ... }

>     fn complex_struct_fn(self: @ContractState, a: ComplexStruct) { ... }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    fn nested_struct_fn(self: @ContractState, a: NestedStructWithField) { ... }
```

    fn complex_fn(
        self: @ContractState,
        arr: Array<Array<felt252>>,
        one: u8,
        two: i16,
        three: ByteArray,
        four: (felt252, u32),
        five: bool,
        six: u256
    ) {
        ...
    }
}
```

A default form of calldata passed to commands requiring it is a series of hex-encoded felts:

```shell
$ sncast --account myuser \
    call \
    --url http://127.0.0.1:5050 \
    --contract-address 0x016ad425af4585102e139d4fb2c76ce786d1aaa1cfcd88a51f3ed66601b23cdd \
    --function tuple_fn \
    --calldata 0x10 0x3 0x0 \
    --block-id latest
```

However, `sncast` allows passing the data in far more handy, human-readable form - as a series of Cairo expressions.
When calldata is delivered in such form, Cast will perform serialization automatically, based on an ABI of the contract we interact with.

To transform Cairo expressions to serialized form, calldata must meet the following requirements:

> * Arguments are comma-separated (on a contrary to a standard serialized input which is whitespace-separatd). Note the lack of commas in the example above - it signals Cast that the input is serialized.

Reviewer: This could maybe be a note or a warning so it's more explicit

* If only one argument without a comma is given, it should be a *nontrivial* literal (e.g. a struct or enum constructor).
  It cannot be a simple numeric litral - `--calldata 0x2137` will be treated as serialized.\

>   To transform such, we need to add a type suffix - for example: `--calldata 0x2137_u96`. See [Caveats](./calldata-transformation.md#caveats)

Reviewer: Would a trailing comma after expression work as well?

Author: Yeah, trailing comma works. I modified one of the test cases to verify it.

  ```shell
  $ sncast --account myuser \
      call \
      --url http://127.0.0.1:5050 \
      --contract-address 0x016ad425af4585102e139d4fb2c76ce786d1aaa1cfcd88a51f3ed66601b23cdd \
      --function complex_fn \
      --calldata \
          array![array![1, 2], array![3, 4, 5], array![6]], \
          12, \
          -128_i8, \
          "Some string (a ByteArray)", \
          ('a shortstring', 32_u32), \
          true, \
          0xffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffff \
      --block-id latest
  ```

  Note the commas separating the arguments.

  2. `nested_struct_fn` - struct nesting:

  ```shell
  $ sncast --account myuser \
      call \
      --url http://127.0.0.1:5050 \
      --contract-address 0x016ad425af4585102e139d4fb2c76ce786d1aaa1cfcd88a51f3ed66601b23cdd \
      --function nested_struct_fn \
      --calldata \
          data_transformer_contract::NestedStructWithField { \
              a: data_transformer_contract::SimpleStruct { a: 10 }, \
              b: 12 \
          } \
      --block-id latest
  ```

## Caveats

> 💡 **Info**
> To force transformation of a single numeric literal, simply add a type suffix to it.

> 💡 **Info**

> > To force transformation of a list of `felt252`, separate its elements with commas.

Reviewer: I think these could be subsection in here, we have a bunch of info and similar in this page already

Reasoning about calldata serialization logic is not always possible for Cast. **In particular, Cast doesn't verify serialized calldata against the ABI**.

When given a calldata, Cast first tries to interpret it as serialized.
When failed, in case of type or length mismatch, it will then try to interpret it as Cairo expressions, according to ABI.

Thus, a literal that *could* be interpreted as a value of an appropriate Cairo type is not always going to be proper calldata. Let's see an example:

Our `DataTransformerContract` exposes a method with signature:
```rust
fn u256_fn(self: @ContractState, a: u256) { ... }
```

We can write:
```shell
$ sncast --account myuser \
  call \
  --url http://127.0.0.1:5050 \
  --contract-address 0x016ad425af4585102e139d4fb2c76ce786d1aaa1cfcd88a51f3ed66601b23cdd \
  --function u256_fn \
  --calldata 0x10 \
  --block-id latest
```

Despite the call data being the proper literal of an `u256`, call fails.

> That's because Cast interpreted `0x10` as a hex-encoded `felt252`, not `u256`. A properly serialized `u256` should have two `felt252` components.

Reviewer: I'd reword it and just say that cast will always treat the data as serialized unless explicitly told to use data transformer (with commas, suffixes etc). I appreciate the detailed explanation but average user will probably just skim through this page if anything.

Author: This section is meant to be in-depth and optional to read for a better understanding. I reworked some ohter sections to emphasize the transformation rules and make them more straightforward.
